Research Log


Finale offers a free version of NotePad 2012.
Sibelius's editor is a free trial, good for 30 days.
Sticking with NotePad for now and will double check with Sibelius later.


What is called MusicXML is not actually xml at all. It is not encoded as
text in fact. The file format is actually mxl (not xml). However, opening
it in NotePad works fine and produces the full sheet music. NotePad can
then export it to xml which is very easy to work with.

Most online cites do not offer the xml but offer mxl instead. Also, the
music offered is typically a full score for an orchestra/band with
multiple parts or a score for piano that blends them. I'm working on
specifically single part/voice scores for Bb (B flat) Clarinet. This 
assumptions means that only one note can be played at a time. The proto-
type I produce should be made to easily scale to percussion instruments
that can play multiple notes at once. This means including the logic
to process multiple parallel rather than serial notes in a measure as
well as a system to quantify the difficulty of correctly harmonizing
with other sections/parts/voices.


In the xml version the part is organized by measures. Measures contain
"print", "attributes", "direction", and "note" subtypes. "print" is
specifying some margins and other relevant aesthetic notes for rendering
the score in pdf. It is not useful to us. "attributes" are useful. They
specify key and time signature as well as clef and transpose (not sure
what the transpose marks are for yet). "direction" is useful, although
it is presented as a marking for whether to place something above or 
below the measure. What it contains is often changes in tempo or
dynamics, as well as instructor markings. "note" is of course the
most useful which specifies everything about an individual note, such
as pitch, duration, type (which is functionally the same as duration,
but is in the more familiar language of quarter/eighth rather than 
milliseconds), and notations (ties, slurs, articulation markings).
"print", "attributes", and "direction" are not always present, but
"note" is always present, even when specifying rests rather than notes.
More notes about less frequent markings will appear below.

Fermata can occur as a notation attached to a "note".
Accidentals are also within the "note".
Time modification is also present within the "note" for several notes
played in one time unit, such as a triplet played within the time of
a quarter note.

Slurs occur on the "note" as notation and have type attached to them,
which is either "start" or "stop". However, the slurs always seem to
"stop" on the note immediately following a "start". So it would appear
that all slurs only cover two notes, however in the pdf and score,
they can and do cover multiple notes. I'm not sure if this is an error
in the xml export or some strange representation. I would expect there
to be a tertiary marking, such as "continue", for notes being slurred,
but not at the end of the slur. This may not necessarily affect our
difficulty measurement, but it is an odd point worth bringing up for
future work.
*Correction* I downloaded a separate mxl and pdf document originally 
for the score I'm examining. The pdf showed slurs of multiple notes.
I cannot examine the mxl however, but I have opened it in NotePad, and
seen that actually the mxl (or NotePad representation) is incorrect
which in turn generated incorrect xml that I'm parsing. This is either
an error in the mxl or an error/limitation of NotePad in parsing the
mxl.




I'm writing the notes into numbers based on octave, but not actually
sure what the lowest feasible note is. I would think A would be the
lowest (in 0 octave), but then again, it might be A flat since that is
a lower note (even though I always think of it as G#). Note sure, but
for now I'm assuming the following structure, which simply gets
repeated with 12 added on for every octave.

01 A b (G #)
02 A
03 A # (B b)
04 B
05 C
06 C # (D b)
07 D
08 D # (E b)
09 E
10 F
11 F # (G b)
12 G

The above is wrong; the below is correct.

00 C
01 C# / Db
02 D
03 D# / Eb
04 E
05 F
06 F# / Gb
07 G
08 G# / Ab
09 A
10 A# / Bb
11 B


I need to double check that powerpoint presentation as well as go
over the proposal again to see what musical elements to focus on
first. I know what elements to pull out and what they mean, but
I'm not sure how to quantify them. For example, when looking at
intervals, obviously larger ones pose more difficulty. However,
once each individual interval is quantified, how do I combine
those into one measurement? Is it simply the average or does the
range of possible intervals matter? Is it the spread of intervals?
Is it some sort of threshold between them that quantifies 
difficulty? I need to figure this out. Each of these is doable,
but I don't know which is more relevant/useful and thus where to
start.